---
layout: post
title: "Dunkl operators"
date: 2019-05-03
category: notes
---

Suppose there is a peculiar sphere that waited to be studied. Some would argue that the best way to do so would be by harmonic analysis using a special set of operators. Let's say we agree with them for the moment and concentrate on the peculiarity of the sphere; for you will soon see that this is not your everyday sphere. This marvellous object has the property to stay invariant under some subset of the orthogonal group $O(n)$.  


The partial differential operators should be seen as operators on the polynomials. You can form an algebra with basis the rank one partial differential operators and with this you should be able to do quite a lot of harmonic analysis. One strange set of objects with respect to this algebra is the set of orthogonal polynomials. Let's not dive too deeply in the theory, it is a wild world, we just need to understand that for system of orthogonal polynomials $\{p_i\}$, each two polynomials are orthogonal to each other via a special inner product and that they respect a three terms recurrence relation. The key complexity in their study is the choice of weight function for the inner product : more exotic families require more exotic weight functions. 

When Charles F. Dunkl tackled the problem, he choose to concentrate his effort on weight functions that were invariant under specific finite subgroups of $O(n)$: Coxeter groups. To define a Coxeter group, one needs some reflections that will generate the group.

## Coxeter groups and root systems

Let $\langle x,y\rangle= \sum_{j=i}^n x_iy_i$ be the classical inner product of vectors of $\mathbb{R}^n$, with $\vert a\vert =\langle x,x\rangle^{1/2}$, the norm. For a vector $a\in\mathbb{R}^n\backslash\{0\}$, the **reflection** along $a$, noted $\sigma_a$ is defined by 


$$
\sigma_a(x) := x-2\frac{\langle x,a\rangle}{|a|^2}a
$$


Now, as you might already know, it would be a shame to write about reflections and Coxeter groups without mentioning root systems. A finite set $R\subset \mathbb{R}^n\backslash\{0\}$ is said to be a **root system** if for each $a,b\in R$, the reflection $\sigma_a(b)\in R$, and if the only multiples of $a$ in $R$ are $a$ and $-a$, it is said to be **reduced**. The **rank** of the root system is the dimension of the space it generates.

This definition is maybe not quite the one you might be used to if you read Humphreys's *Introduction to Lie Algebra and Representation Theory* or Bourbaki's *Groupes et algèbres de Lie*. As the goal of Dunkl is not to classify the semisimple Lie algebras, he will not care so much about having the **crystallographic condition**:

$$2\frac{\langle a, b \rangle}{|b|^2} \in \mathbb{Z} \quad \forall a,b \in R.$$

Those generalized root systems behave quite well. If one chooses a vector $a_0\in\mathbb{R}^n$ such that its  inner product with any of the members of the root system $R$ is non-zero, then the set of **positive roots** is defined as $R_+:= \{a\in R \mid \langle a, a_0 \rangle > 0 \}$ and the set $R_-$ by $-R_+$. With this, the **Coxeter groupe** $W(R)$ is defined as the subgroup of $O(n)$ generated by the reflections with respect to the positive roots. There is a basis $S=\{s_1,\dots , s_d\} \subset R$  for $\operatorname{span}_{\mathbb{R}}(R)$ such that whenever $a\in R_+$ there exist positive constants $c_i$ such that $a=\sum_{j=1}^dc_js_j$. They are the **simple roots** and the corresponding reflections are called the **simple reflections**. 

There are less root systems than you might think! A fun project for the interested person is to classify all possible root systems. I would suggest starting by classifying crystallographic reduced root systems of rank $n$, that is that generate the whole euclidean space they lie in. The mathematics involved are accessible to a strong undergraduate, but recollecting the steps is a little challenge that will distract you. 

However, for the sake of clarity, here is one of the most simple non-trivial reduced root system : $A_2\subset \mathbb{R}^3$.  Let's denote the canonical basis of $\mathbb{R}^3$ by $\{e_1,e_2,e_3\}$. The positive roots are $R_+ = \{\sqrt{2}(e_1-e_2)/2,\sqrt{2}(e_1-e_3)/2,\sqrt{2}(e_2-e_3)/2\}$ with the coefficients just there to ensure reductability.

[Image]

The Coxeter group of $A_2$ is simply $S_3$, the permutation group of three elements. 



Now, let's postpone the discussion on root systems, it would take us too far and will be the subject of another note. The next thing we will need is a $W(R)$-invariant weight function. Now, as we are taking a mathematicians approach, we will just ask for such a function to exist and do all the theory in general. Of course, if you want to study a specific system, a fortunate heuristic might tell you which reflection group to take and impose one strange weight function.

Let $R$ be a root system and $W(R)$ be its associated Coxeter group. A **multiplicity function** $\kappa$ on $R$ is a $W(R)$-invariant function with value in $\mathbb{R}$. Specifically, it means that acting with $\omega \in W(R)$ on any elements of the root system will not change the value of $\kappa$. 

Directly from the definition, note that conjugating a reflection $\sigma_a$ by $\omega$ gives $\omega  \sigma_a \omega^{-1}=\sigma_{\omega a}$ and thus $\kappa$ is constant on conjugacy classes as all reflection are in the root system.

 We have the theory we need, an example, and some good faith! Time to see what Dunkl operators are up to!

## Dunkl operators

With the work we have done, we are ready to define a $\kappa$-weighted gradient that will be the base for defining the Dunkl operators. Let $\Pi^n$ the space of polynomials of $n$ variables and let the usual gradient be denoted by $\nabla$ . For $p\in \Pi^n$,  $x\in \mathbb{R}^n$ let

$$\nabla_{\kappa}p(x) := \nabla p(x) + \sum_{r\in R_+}\kappa(r){p(x)-\sigma_rp(x)\over \langle x,r \rangle } r.$$


The **Dunkl operator**  $\mathcal{D}_a$ associated to $a\in \mathbb{R}$ is given by 


$$\mathcal{D}_ap(x) := \langle \nabla_{\kappa}p(x),a\rangle.$$


On the canonical basis $\{e_1, \dots , e_n\}$, the Dunkl operators are denoted by $\{\mathcal{D}_1,\dots , \mathcal{D}_n\}$.

### Example 

Before going any further, we should make sure that we are working with something concrete, and the best way of doing so is by making an example! Let $R$ be of type $A_2$, so that the Coxeter group $W(R)= S_3$. We are then working in $\mathbb{R}^2$ and the set of positive roots consists of three roots $\{\sqrt{2}(1,-1,0)/2,\sqrt{2}(1,0,-1)/2,\sqrt{2}(0,1,-1)/2\}$. In $S_3$, all elements form an unique conjugacy class and thus $\kappa$ is a constant on it.

Computations gives that the Dunkl operators in this case are given by


$$\mathcal{D}_i = {\partial \over \partial x_i} + \kappa\sum_{i\neq j}{1-(ij)\over x_i-x_j},$$


with $(ij)$ the permutation sending $i$ to $j$ and vice-versa. 







Dunkl, Charles F. “Differential-Difference Operators Associated to Reflection Groups.” *Transactions of the American Mathematical Society* 311, no. 1 (1989): 167–83. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2001022>.